---
layout: post
title: "I Got Laid Off a Year Ago and I Still Don't Know How to Feel About It"
date: 2024-04-01 0:00:00
---

Going on LinkedIn can really bring me down sometimes.  Peppered amongst the self-promotion, "networking", engagement-baiting, etc, you'll see posts that follow this template:

    I regret to announce that I have been affected by the layoffs at ABC company.
    The last X years have been a wonderful experience, and I've really enjoyed...
    
It's a bit of a performative act, where the poster wants to announce that they need a job (like, **now**) but also want to make it clear they won't be a problem for any future employer.  Kindof like the age-old advice about not complaining about your ex to your new date.  Not a good look.

In any case, it sucks.  It's one sucky thing in a long line of sucky things about being unemployed.  It's also such a subjective experience, getting laid off.  It's hard to give any kind of advice to someone in a situation like that.  Hell, I can't really even imagine what advice I'd give **myself**.  It's a weird feeling, and I keep revisiting it, every time I see a post like that.

In May of 2023, I was laid off, along with 20 percent of my peers.  I'd been hired just a year earlier and looking back on it, my employer clearly overhired.  It was probably a combination of rock-bottom interest rates and some level of delusion about what post-pandemic life was really going to be like.  My day-to-day work life, up until I was laid off, was an excruciating pendulum swing between the excitement of working for a "prestige company" full of talented and interesting people and, well, not really having much to do.

This feeling, the combination of excitement and anxiety, of opportunity and feeling like I'd really "made it", caused me to overlook the warning signs.  There weren't any "red flags" -- no passive-aggressive managers or backstabbing coworkers or anything like that -- more like a bunch of things which felt, "off".  When I raised those concerns (mostly the lack of direction and impactful projects to work on), I was assured again and again by my supervisors and peers that I should have patience, that this kind of thing happens here sometimes, we periodically recalibrate, etc.  I did my best to tamp down my anxiety, adopted a positive, helpful attitude.

Getting a negative performance review was a major blow.  I think I disassociated through the entire event.  How could my performance be negative, if there were no approved projects for me to contribute to?  The one project of any significance I'd been involved in was deprioritized (not "impactful" enough).  The organization was opaque - projects were all ranked by impact, with every team and department angling for the plum projects.  Maybe I hadn't asked enough questions? Hadn't adequately expressed my concerns?  Maybe this was my fault.  

This was my first senior developer position.  Maybe I should have known how to navigate the system, find my own projects, and pitch them to my manager?  That didn't feel right.  It didn't seem realistic for me, a new hire fresh off of onboarding, to find impactful work in an organization with thousands of developers in a codebase with hundreds of thousands (millions?) of lines of code.  As a self-taught developer, I'm familiar imposter syndrome and the work it takes to keep it at bay.  It fell on me like a ton of bricks.

My manager assured me that despite the negative review, I showed potential.  Queue the same lines I'd heard for months - good projects were just around the corner.  Keep your head down and stick to the plan, and this'll soon be in the rear view.  Six weeks later, two thousand heads rolled.  The market rewarded my former employer with a bump in the stock price.  Talking heads praised the CEO for "making the tough choices", conveniently ignoring the fact that it was the same CEO who went on a hiring binge which put us in this situation in the first place.  I'm not bitter.

The job search is difficult, nothing new here.  Everybody asked about my experience with my previous employer, wanted to know what it was like, what cool technologies I'd worked with, or projects I'd been involved in.  I did my best to change the subject to work I was *actually* proud of, work that I'd done with my previous employer.  It could've been worse.  I'd gotten a generous severance, followed by unemployment benefits.  My partner was able to pick up extra work.  The layoff occurred in late spring, so most of my kids' activities were on pause for the summer break.  I did my best to prioritize my mental health, but it was rough.  The layoff itself was hard, but the events leading up to it made it so much worse.  I didn't Leetcode eight hours a day, didn't start a side project.  Basically, I spent half of my free time applying and interviewing, and the other half working to keep myself from sliding into a depression.

Happily, I landed in a good place.  I really enjoy my current job, like my coworkers, feel good about the mission.  Most importantly, there's good work to do, with plenty over the horizon.  But the experience has changed me.  If being laid off is "just business, not personal," isn't being hired the same thing?  I don't feel comfortable with purely transactional relationships, at least not when those relationships dominate most of my waking hours.  I don't want to become jaded either; I find cynicism to be tiresome and boring.  I guess for now I've just decided to be ok with being uncomfortable with the whole thing.

Importantly, I'm reminded that I need to trust my gut.  For a year, I tried to ignore the voice in my head that something wasn't right.  I listened to people around me, who were well-intentioned, but they really didn't have any more information than I did.  The result is I undermined my own self-confidence.  Gaslit myself, if that's even a thing.  

I don't know what to tell the folks who are out of work, who've been applying for months and gotten nothing but bad results.  I can tell you that I know what it's like, know how hard it can be.  The whole thing still seems a bit surreal, even a year later.  I can't control market forces, global pandemics, interest rates, but I can recognize that something's not right, and I can act on it.  

That's about all I've got.

